[Music]
seven Seward
when the Lincoln administration suddenly
found itself faced with open hostilities
and accompanying espionage and spy
intrigues in 1861
one of the first officials to react to
the situation was Secretary of State
Seward his organization combined both
the police function pursuing individuals
with a view to their incarceration and
prosecution and the intelligence
function gathering information regarding
the loyalty and political views of
citizens without any particular regard
for possible violations of the law in
combining the two tasks of course their
distinction often became lost one
commentator notes quote the government's
first efforts to control the civilian
population were conducted by the
Secretary of State for reasons both
personal and official William H Seward
the premier of the cabinet had an
unquenchable zeal for dabbling in
everyone else's business in addition
since the establishment of the federal
government the office of the secretary
of state had been somewhat of a
catch-all for duties no other executive
agency was designed to handle with the
war and the new problem of subversion on
the homefront Seward soon began to busy
himself about arrests of political
prisoners their incarceration and then
the next step of setting up secret
agents to ferret them out end quote
footnote George fort Milton Abraham
Lincoln and the Fifth Column New York
the vanguard press 1942 page 48 end
footnote there are no informative
records as to how or why the initial
arrests of political prisoners and the
creation of a secret service fell to
secretary Seward it is entirely likely
that he requested these duties the more
important consideration however concerns
the extent to which he responsibly
carried out these obligations according
to one of the Secretary's biographers
quote a
tests were made for any one of many
reasons where men were suspected of
having given or intending to give aid or
comfort to the enemy in any substantial
way as by helping in the organization of
troops by supplying arms or provisions
or selling the bonds of the states and
secession by public or private
communications that opposed United
States enlistments or encouraged those
of the Confederacy by expressing
sympathy with the south or attacking the
administration by belonging to
organizations designed to obstruct the
progress of the war in fact for almost
any act that indicated a desire to see
the government fail in its effort to
conquer disunion end quote
footnote Frederick Bancroft the life of
William H Seward vol 2 New York Harper &
Brothers 1900 page 260 and footnote but
the question was not simply one of fact
a number of due process considerations
were raised by the manner and nature of
the arrest and detention of political
offenders quote the person suspected of
disloyalty was often seized at night
searched borne off to the nearest fort
deprived of his valuables and locked up
in a case mate or in a battery generally
crowded with men that had had similar
experiences it was not rare for arrests
regarded as political to be made by
order of the Secretary of War or of some
military officer but with only a few
exceptions these prisoners came under
the control of the Secretary of State
just as if he had taken the original
action for a few days the newcomer
usually varied reflection and loud
enunciation of the administration but
the discomforts of his confinement soon
led him to seek his freedom when he
resolved to send for friends and an
attorney he was informed that the rules
forbade visitors except in rare
instances that attorneys were entirely
excluded and the prisoner who sought
their aid would greatly prejudice his
case only unsealed letters would be
forwarded and if they contained
affectional statements they are returned
to the writer or filed in the Department
of State with other papers relating to
the case there still remained a
possibility it was generally assumed of
speedy relief by appealed to the
secretary in person then a long
narrative describing the experiences of
a man whose innocence was equaled only
by his misfortunes was addressed to the
nervous wiry all-powerful man keeping
watch over international relations
political offenders and affairs
generally the letter was usually read by
the chief clerk or assistant secretary
and then merely filed a second third and
fourth petition for liberation and
explanations was sent to the department
but with no result saved that the
materials for the study of history and
human nature were there by and large the
secretary was calm in the belief that
the man was a plotter and could do no
harm while he remained in custody end
quote to rectify this situation two
important steps were taken in February
1862 on st. Valentine's Day an executive
order was issued providing for the
wholesale release of most political
prisoners accepting only quote persons
detained as spies in the service of the
insurgents or others whose release at
the present moment may be deemed
incompatible with the public safety end
quote
in addition a special review panel
consisting of Judge Edwards Pierpont and
General John a Dix was established to
expedite releases under this directive
footnote the correspondence of this
panel and lists of those released at its
direction may be found in Fred C
Ainsworth and Joseph W Kirkley comps the
War of the rebellion a compilation of
the official records of the Union and
Confederate armies series 2 vol 2
Washington US government print office
1897 in footnote with regard to
intelligence activities Seward
apparently employed Allan Pinkerton for
such operations during the summer of
1861 quote but did not keep him along
perhaps because he felt that the
detective was too close to the President
and Seward wanted his own man whose
loyalty would be direct to him end quote
a listening post was sought in Canada
for purposes of checking on the
activities of Confederate agents and to
monitor the trend of sentiment in
British North America during the
secession crisis footnote C John W
Headley Confederate operations in Canada
and New York New York and Washington the
neo Publishing Company 1906
also if a related interest is James D
Bullock the Secret Service of the
Confederate States in Europe New York
Thomas your salaf 1956 originally
published 1884 in footnote former
Massachusetts congressman George Ashman
was appointed special agent to Canada
for three months in early 1861 at a
salary of $10 a day plus expenses Seward
advanced $500 cash on account another
operative
Charles S Ogden took residence in Quebec
and additional stations were
subsequently established at Halifax and
st. John's among other seaports a
domestic network also came into being
while the Canadian groups struggled to
recruit confidential agents quote
Seward's secret
service letter book for 1861 was full of
inquiries dispatched to friends and
trusted official associates throughout
the country asking them to discover
persons who could be put on important
investigating tasks he wanted a discreet
and active man for the northern frontier
to arrest spies seeking entrance from
Canada and offered to pay such a man
$100 a month a little later he appointed
a special agent at Niagara Falls to
examine the persons coming over the
suspension bridge and seize and hold any
who seemed suspicious he sought without
immediate results a good man for Chicago
and another for Detroit he authorized
the United States Marshal at Boston to
employ two detectives for two months
time each at $150 a month this was
particularly urgent therefore let the
marshal consult the governor of the
state and take effective measures to
break up the business of making and
sending shoes for the rebel army end
quote
almost unnoticed Seward's Intelligence
organization began to grow though its
agents often proved to be ineffective
amateurs shortly however professionalism
discipline and a careful sense of
mission came to the Secretary's spy
Corps and the purpose of Lafayette
Charles Baker
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you